# Serenity 6.2.1 - 6.2.4 Release Notes (2022-10-11)

## Fixed Null Reference Exception in DefaultSqlConnections Causing Sergen Failure (6.2.1)

In version 6.2.0, we introduced logging support for SQL methods. However, because logging via dependency injection is not available in the Sergen environment, and due to a missing null check in DefaultSqlConnections, the Sergen command was failing.

## Recreated `package-lock.json` File During VSIX Template Build (6.2.2, StartSharp)

During development, we usually reference the `corelib` directory in our `package.json` as follows:

```json
{
  "name": "startsharp.web",
  "dependencies": {
    "@serenity-is/corelib": "file:../../Serenity/src/Serenity.Scripts/corelib",
```

This allows us to test changes in the `corelib` without the need to publish an npm package, directly from the `Serenity` submodule in `StartSharp`.

When packaging the VSIX template, an automated process updated this dependency to the latest version of corelib on npm:

```json
{
  "name": "startsharp.web",
  "dependencies": {
    "@serenity-is/corelib": "6.1.4",
```

However, this change did not affect the `package-lock.json`, which still contained the folder reference.

We distribute both `package.json` and `package-lock.json` together in the StartSharp template. Therefore, when someone created a new project from our template, the `package-lock.json` still contained a folder reference.

This caused npm to create a symlink to a non-existent folder instead of downloading corelib from npm.

To address this, our automated process now deletes the `package-lock.json` and `node_modules` folder after updating the `package.json` and running the `npm install` command. As a result, users will receive a valid `package-lock.json` file.

If you created a project using the StartSharp template between versions 6.1.0 and 6.2.1, you may need to update the Serenity packages, delete the `package-lock.json` and `node_modules`, and then run `npm install`.


## Fixed Restoration of Modular Typings for Package References in `node_modules` Folders (6.2.2, StartSharp)

In the `Serenity.Pro.Coder` file, we had a target to restore modular typings from package or project references to folders under `node_modules`. This restoration occurred instantly in Visual Studio or during the build process.

This feature was implemented to provide a workaround for shipping modular typing files with NuGet packages that TypeScript can use. TypeScript might not locate these files under users' NuGet folders, which can vary between users or PCs.

Due to an expression mistake in the MSBuild target file, the typings for the Serenity.Pro.Extensions package were being restored to an invalid folder like `node_modules\@serenity-is\pro.extensions;@serenity-is\pro.extensions`, instead of `node_modules\@serenity-is\pro.extensions` as intended.

If your project had a reference to Serenity.Pro.Coder between versions 6.1.0 and 6.2.1, you may need to update the Serenity packages, delete the `node_modules` folder, and then run `npm install`.

## Relocated RestoreTypings to Serenity.Net.Web

We previously had a `RestoreTypings` target in both `Serenity.Pro.Coder` and `common-features`. This target restored `index.d.ts` files from NuGet package and project references to the `typings` folder for namespaced ones, and to the `node_modules\@serenity-is` folders for modular ones. This restoration was achieved without needing to run `sergen restore`.

However, this feature only worked for projects that referenced the `Serenity.Pro.Coder` package. To expand its usability to other projects, we have moved this MSBuild target to the `Serenity.Net.Web` package.

After updating `Serenity.Net.Web`, you may notice that even if you clear the `typings` folder with Visual Studio open, the directories and files will be restored instantly.

If you wish to disable this feature for any reason, add the following line to your project file:

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
  <RestoreTypings>false</RestoreTypings>
</PropertyGroup>
```

## Fixed the Issue Causing Grids to Not Display Data in Serene After Updating to 6.1.x (6.2.4)

The `DataGrid.defaultRowHeight` and `DataGrid.defaultHeaderHeight` values were originally undefined by default. These values are passed to the SlickGrid instance via the `getSlickOptions()` method of the `DataGrid` class.

With the rewrite of SlickGrid as `SleekGrid` and the optional dependency of `jQuery`, a problem emerged in Serene when updating `Serenity` packages to the latest versions.

In this update, we replaced `jQuery.extend` with `Object.assign` to apply default SlickGrid options to the options you provide to the SlickGrid constructor. These methods are mostly compatible, but a subtle yet important difference exists between them.

While `jQuery.extend` skips properties with `undefined` values, `Object.assign` does not. Consequently, the undefined default row height passed from `getSlickOptions` to the grid was overwriting the SlickGrid default value.

It's worth noting that this issue did not reproduce in StartSharp because the premium theme set `DataGrid.defaultRowHeight` to compensate for the larger default font size.