# Serenity 8.0.0 Release Notes (2023-11-16)

## Switching to .NET 8

This major update supports .NET 8. Before transitioning to this version, ensure your Visual Studio 2022 version is `17.8.0` or later. Install .NET SDK 8 through the Visual Studio update or manually if not using VS. In your project file, adjust the target to `net8.0`:

```xml
<TargetFramework>net8.0</TargetFramework>`
```

Next, update the following packages to the listed versions or higher:

```xml
<PackageReference Include="Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.NewtonsoftJson" Version="8.0.0" />
<PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Data.Sqlite" Version="8.0.0" />
<PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Data.SqlClient" Version="5.1.2" />
```

Then, update Serenity and Pro packages to version 8.0. This update should be sufficient to transition to .NET 8 as there aren't many breaking changes affecting Serenity-based applications.

Note: Serenity 8.0+ will no longer support .NET 6/.NET 7.

We will not release a .NET 8 version of Serene yet, as most users who download it might not have the required Visual Studio 17.8.0 update, causing issues for newcomers. Serene users should apply the changes noted in these release notes to their apps after updating their Visual Studio.

## Several NuGet Packages Updated

The following NuGet packages have been updated:

- `Microsoft.TypeScript.MSBuild` to 5.2.2 (now the recommended TypeScript version.)
- `Newtonsoft.Json`
- `Scriban`
- `Mono.Cecil`
- `Microsoft.Data.SqlClient`
- `Dapper`
- `MailKit`
- `Nuglify`
- `SixLabors.ImageSharp`, etc.

## CSS Files for Serene Moved to Serenity.Extensions [Breaking Change]

The `serenity.css`, currently exclusive to Serene, has been relocated to `Serenity.Extensions` as a static asset for easier updates.

After updating, delete `wwwroot/Content/serenity/serenity.css` and replace the reference to `serenity.css` in your `appsettings.json` with `~/Serenity.Extensions/common-style.css`.

Serene users should also update their `~/Content/site/common-theme.css` reference to `~/Serenity.Extensions/common-theme.css`.

These changes simplify the process for Serene users to update their core CSS files.

## Removed Legacy Scripts

The following legacy scripts and CSS files have been removed from the Serenity.Assets package:

- `Content/aristo/aristo.css`
- `Content/bootstrap-theme.css` (Bootstrap 3)
- `Content/bootstrap.css` (Bootstrap 3)
- `Content/ionicons.css`
- `Content/page.css`
- `Content/simple-line-icons.css`
- `Content/slick-default-theme.css`
- `Content/slick.columnpicker.css`
- `Content/slick.headerbuttons.css`
- `Content/slick.headermenu.css`
- `Content/slick.pager.css`
- `Scripts/bootstrap.js` (Bootstrap 3)
- `Scripts/jquery/jquery.slim.js`
- `Scripts/jquery.cropzoom.js`
- `Scripts/jquery.iframe-transport.js`
- `Scripts/jquery.json.js`
- `Scripts/jquery.scrollintoview.js`
- `Scripts/jquery.slimscroll.js`
- `Scripts/jsrender.js`
- `Scripts/pace.js`
- `Scripts/react*.js`
- `Scripts/rsvp.js`
- `Scripts/saltarelle/linq.js`
- `Scripts/saltarelle/mscorlib.js`

These files have not been used by Serene/StartSharp for a long time. If any of the above files are still referenced in your `appsettings.bundles.json`, remove those references or install those files via `libman.json` or similar.

## Updated jQuery and Removed Legacy Versioned jQuery Files

We updated jQuery to 3.7.1 and removed jQuery 3.5.1 files from Serenity.Assets. If your `appsettings.bundles.json` contains a reference like `"~/Serenity.Assets/Scripts/jquery-{version}.js"`, please change it to `"~/Serenity.Assets/jquery/jquery.js"` (currently 3.7.1 and will remain the latest version) or install it via libman.

The full version of jQuery UI, e.g., `jquery-ui-1.12.1.js`, has been removed from Serenity.Assets as it lacks the patches applied to `jquery-ui.js`, our trimmed custom version. Replace any references in `appsettings.bundles.json` like `"~/Serenity.Assets/Scripts/jquery-ui-{version}.js"` with `"~/Serenity.Assets/Scripts/jquery-ui.js"` or install it via libman/npm (though without our patches).

## Updated Bootstrap

Bootstrap has been updated to 5.3.2, providing more customization options via CSS variables and supporting a dark theme.

The rules in Serenity.Pro.Theme have been updated to match the Bootstrap version and utilize new CSS variables and dark mode introduced by Bootstrap.

Make changes in `_Layout.cshtml` and `_LayoutHead.cshtml` so that a `data-bs-theme="dark"` attribute is added to the HTML element when using the `cosmos-dark` or similar dark theme.

## Updated CKEditor to the Last Open-Source Version

CKEditor has been updated to 4.22.1, the last open-source version. We've also switched to the CKEditor `moono-lisa` skin, which is flatter than `moono`.

## ESBuild and TSBuild Related Changes

We updated esbuild to 0.19.15, which has some breaking changes related to watch mode.

Please update `tsbuild` to its latest version in `package.json` (currently `8.0.0`) and apply changes in the StartSharp/Serene repository's `tsbuild.js` to your project.

TSBuild now has a type definition so that you can see the options it provides.

## Select2 Localization Integrated with Serenity

We implemented Select2 localization using our `localText` and `stringFormat` functions.

The `select2-locales` folder has been removed from Serenity.Assets as they were not suitable for use with Serenity localization.

## StartSharp Includes a Git Ignore File

The StartSharp template now includes a `.gitignore` file with ignore patterns suitable for general Serenity applications:

- .restore-stamp
- Thumbs.db
- StyleCop.Cache
- UpgradeLog.htm
- *.bak
- *.log
- *.orig
- *.pdb
- *.pubxml
- *.suo
- *.user
- appsettings*.machine.json
- .vs/
- App_Data/
- bin/
- node_modules/
- obj/
- TestResults/
- wwwroot/esm/
