# Serenity 8.0.7 Release Notes (2023-12-07)

## Transitioning to System.Text.Json from Newtonsoft.Json in .NET

We are migrating to System.Text.Json from Newtonsoft.Json, as it is the recommended and more performant library in .NET.

Please note that the transition initially occured in the 8.0.1 version. We patched some issues, and as of 8.0.7 it is stable.

### Compatibility and Workarounds

There exist several compatibility issues between Newtonsoft and System.Text.Json. Check the following link for detailed insights: [Migrate from Newtonsoft to System.Text.Json](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/serialization/system-text-json/migrate-from-newtonsoft?pivots=dotnet-8-0).

To ensure compatibility, we've implemented various workarounds such as using custom converters, specific serializer settings, etc.

For example, in versions before .NET 8, handling missing members by raising an exception was not feasible with System.Text.Json.

### Update Requirements for Users

After the transition, users must add attributes specific to System.Text.Json to properties and classes that previously had Newtonsoft-specific attributes. For instance:

- Replace `Newtonsoft.Json.JsonProperty` with `System.Text.Json.Serialization.JsonPropertyName`.
- Modify converters and usage of attributes like `JsonIgnore`, among others.

An example includes the `UserListRequest DataProtector` property, which previously had a `JsonIgnore` attribute specific to Newtonsoft.

> You may choose to keep Newtonsoft specific attributes while adding their System.Text.Json counterparts to keep compatibility and still use Newtonsoft.Json in some parts of your application.

### Transition Guidelines

The converter classes unique to System.Text.Json reside in the `Serenity.JsonConverters` namespace and end with `JsonConverter`. For example:

- The former converter specific to Newtonsoft.Json for rows was `JsonRowConverter`.
- The new one for System.Text.Json is `Serenity.JsonConverters.RowJsonConverter`.

When using `[JsonConverter(typeof(...))]` attribute, users should exercise caution to specify the correct type, as the attribute name remains the same for both libraries while only the namespace is different.

To transition, users need to:

- Remove the `.AddNewtonsoftJson` block in `Startup.cs`.

- Replace it with the following line to configure serialization settings similar to the previous Serenity Newtonsoft.Json-based settings:
    ```csharp
    services.Configure<JsonOptions>(options => JSON.Defaults.Populate(options.JsonSerializerOptions));
    ```
    
- Additionally, remove this package reference from the project file:
    ```xml
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.NewtonsoftJson" Version="8.0.0" />
    ```
    
### Behavior Changes

Unlike Newtonsoft.Json, `IncludeNulls` is replaced with `WriteNulls` as we will only ignore nulls during serialization. The parameter names are also changed to `writeNulls` to align with this behavior.

System.Text.Json will be used for `JSON.Stringify` methods, and there won't be any means to use Newtonsoft other than manually calling `Newtonsoft.Json.JsonConvert`.


### Retaining Newtonsoft.Json Reference

We have not yet removed the Newtonsoft.Json reference as it is necessary for referencing serialization attributes, ensuring compatibility. While we may consider its removal in the future, it won't happen immediately.


## Dashboard Page Rewrite with JSX-DOM

The StartSharp dashboard page, previously containing boilerplate markup within `DashboardIndex.cshtml` and `DashboardPage.tsx` files, has undergone a rewrite using jsx-dom.

All HTML markup in the `DashboardIndex.cshtml` file has been transformed into functional components, each residing within separate folders and files.

For instance, consider the `ChatCard` component located under `Modules/Common/Dashboard/chat/chat-card.tsx`:

```tsx
import { messageList } from "./chat-mock-data";
import { ChatMessages } from "./chat-messages";
import { ChatHeader } from "./chat-header";
import { ChatSidebar } from "./chat-sidebar";

export const ChatCard = () =>
    <div class="card s-dashboard-card s-chat">
        <div class="row g-0" data-status="online">
            <ChatSidebar />
            <div class="col-12 col-lg-7 col-xl-8">
                <ChatHeader />
                <div class="position-relative">
                    <ChatMessages messages={messageList} />
                </div>
                <div class="flex-grow-0 py-3 px-4">
                    <div class="input-group">
                        <input type="text" class="form-control" placeholder="Type your message" />
                        <button class="btn btn-primary">Send</button>
                    </div>
                </div>
            </div>
        </div>
    </div>
```

Additionally, `ChatSidebar`, `ChatHeader`, and `ChatMessages` are also functional components.

This rewrite serves as a helpful example for jsx-dom, simplifying the creation and customization of your own dashboards. It marks a significant milestone in our transition from `jQuery` to `jsx-dom`.

## The Default jsxImportSource Set to `jsx-dom/min`

In version 6.8.0, we adopted the JSX Automatic Runtime feature by configuring the `jsx` property in `tsconfig.json` to `react-jsx`:

```json
{
    "jsx": "react-jsx",
    "jsxImportSource": "preact"
}
```

Initially, the default import source remained as "preact" for those utilizing React or Preact based `.tsx` files in their projects. Consequently, we included a JSX pragma atop all our samples and components using `jsx-dom`:

```jsx
/** @jsxImportSource jsx-dom/min */
```

Moving forward, it appears that `jsx-dom` will be our default library choice due to its lack of VDOM (virtual DOM) usage, aligning better with our historically designed widget system centered around jQuery UI widgets.

In certain limited scenarios, Preact might still find use. For instance, our `EmailClient` utilizes `preact`. Should you wish to utilize React or Preact in specific TSX files, simply include the pragma:

```jsx
/** @jsxImportSource preact */
```

Any TSX file within our feature packages will default to assuming `jsx-dom/min` and will not include the pragma comment. Should your tsconfig.json file have a different default jsxImportSource configuration, either update the default to `jsx-dom/min` or add a pragma to any sample code you adopt from ours.


## A New UI Library Based on `jsx-dom`

We are currently in the process of developing a new NPM package, `@serenity-is/base`, which will encompass core functions and classes from `@serenity-is/corelib`, predominantly from the old `Q` namespace.

This forthcoming base library will be shared between `@serenity-is/corelib` and a new UI library, tentatively named `@serenity-is/ui`. The UI library, likely based on `jsx-dom`, is in the planning phase and is expected to have no dependencies on `jQuery` or `jQuery UI`.

Presently, `@serenity-is/base` is integrated into `@serenity-is/corelib`, so no changes are required in this release.


## Improvements to Sergen

We have incorporated MSBuild's new command-line build property extraction feature in Sergen for .NET 8+. This enhancement facilitates a more consistent determination of properties like `OutDir`, `TargetFramework`, etc., thereby enhancing Sergen's ability to locate your output assemblies.

Furthermore, Sergen now accommodates passing MSBuild properties to avoid manual parsing of property items from the project file. This modification contributes to cases where Sergen previously encountered difficulties determining properties such as the output path, configuration, etc. This update not only accelerates transformation speeds but also mitigates the need for Sergen to parse properties itself.

For instance, derived from our `Directory.Build.targets` file in the common-features repository:

```xml
<Target Name="TransformServerTypings" AfterTargets="AfterBuild">
    <Exec Command="dotnet sergen servertypings -p &quot;$(ProjectFileName)&quot; 
    -prop:Configuration=$(Configuration) 
    -prop:AssemblyName=&quot;$(AssemblyName)&quot; 
    -prop:OutDir=&quot;$(OutDir.Trim('\'))&quot; 
    -prop:RootNamespace=$(RootNamespace) 
    -prop:TargetFramework=$(TargetFramework)"  />
</Target>
```

Utilizing these properties already available in the current build context, Sergen can forego calling MSBuild or manually parsing your project file, resulting in accelerated transformations.

We have also implemented improved methods for Sergen to discover included files from `tsconfig.json`, aligning the algorithm more closely with TypeScript's resolution process.

Moreover, Sergen now utilizes a cached file system for TypeScript parsing transformations, significantly enhancing transform times for projects with numerous files.


## Dynamic Loading Use JSON Fetch to DynamicData Endpoint

Functions such as `getLookup`, `getForm`, `getColumns`, etc., under `ScriptData`, will default to using `~/DynamicData` (JSON format) instead of `~/DynJS.axd` (script format).

This modification aims to avoid using `eval`, considered harmful, during the dynamic loading of lookups, etc. Additionally, async versions of `ScriptData` functions like `getLookupAsync`, `getFormAsync`, etc., now utilize `fetch` instead of jQuery's ajax/XHR.


## Service Methods Return Types Are `PromiseLike`

Methods like `serviceCall` / `serviceRequest` and generated services now return `PromiseLike` instead of `JQueryXHR`. This change prepares for a future replacement of jQuery ajax calls with `fetch`. While it's currently possible to cast the return type to JQueryXHR, this behavior may not always persist.


## Serenity.CoreLib.js no longer includes TypeScript Helpers **`[Breaking Change]`**

We have discontinued shipping TypeScript's `tslib` functions (e.g., helpers) with Serenity.CoreLib.js. If you still have namespaces (non-modular) TypeScript code, please remove the `"noEmitHelpers": true` line from your tsconfig.json.


## IFileSystem Interface Has GetLastWriteTimeUtc Method **`[Breaking Change]`**

The `IFileSystem` interface now incorporates a new `GetLastWriteTimeUtc` method. Consequently, the extra `IGeneratorFileSystem` interface and the same property from `ITemporaryFileSystem` have been removed. If you have a custom implementation for `IFileSystem`, ensure the implementation of the `GetLastWriteTimeUtc` method.