# Serenity 8.6.0 Release Notes (2024-07-13)

These release notes detail the significant changes made between versions 8.2.2 and 8.6.0. For a complete list of changes, please refer to the [Serenity Change Log](https://github.com/serenity-is/Serenity/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md).

## Complete Removal of jQuery Dependency

The Serenity core library no longer depends on jQuery or any packages that use jQuery. The following script entries in `appsettings.bundles.json` can be safely removed unless explicitly used in some of your pages:

```json
        "~/Serenity.Assets/jquery/jquery.js",
        "~/Serenity.Assets/Scripts/jquery.autoNumeric.js",
        "~/Serenity.Assets/Scripts/jquery.colorbox.js",
        "~/Serenity.Assets/Scripts/jquery.maskedinput.js",
        "~/Serenity.Assets/Scripts/jquery.validate.js",
        "~/Serenity.Assets/Scripts/select2.js",
```

Select2, Autonumeric, and Validate are now integrated into the core library with jQuery dependencies removed. Images will open in a new tab if `jquery.colorbox` is not available. We currently do not have a recommendation for `maskedinput` due to its limited use; you may add a validation rule to check for the expected format.

If you still need jQuery or any libraries that depend on it, it is okay to leave them as is. Serenity will work fine with jQuery loaded, and Fluent will redirect events through jQuery's event system for interoperability.

## Renaming of Select2Editor to ComboboxEditor

The base `Select2Editor` class, which `LookupEditorBase` and others are based on, has been renamed to `ComboboxEditor` to abstract the dependency on a specific dropdown type. Currently, `ComboboxEditor` uses the integrated version of `select2`, but we may replace it or implement other combobox types via external components in the future.

## Removal of Template Files and Deprecation of Related Widgets

- Support for `Template.html` and `.ts.html` template files has been removed.
- `TemplatedWidget` is deprecated; use `Widget` instead.
- `TemplatedPanel` is deprecated; use `BasePanel`.
- `TemplatedDialog` is deprecated; use `BaseDialog`.

These changes reflect the deprecation of the legacy template mechanism in version 8.2.0. Use the `renderContents` method to return markup via TSX/JSX-DOM or `Fluent(...).getNode()`. While the legacy `getTemplate()` will still be supported internally, it is not recommended.

## Deprecation of TypeScript Experimental Decorators

Serenity uses several decorators like `@Decorators.registerClass()` similarly to C# attributes. In the past, enabling decorator support in TypeScript required using an experimental flag in `tsconfig.json`:

```json
"experimentalDecorators": true
```

As of TypeScript 5, experimental decorator support is no longer required. Serenity still supports both the experimental and modern versions, but it is recommended to remove the line above from your `tsconfig.json` after updating Serenity and TypeScript (e.g., your Visual Studio version).

Since the new version of TypeScript decorators is only supported by ESBuild 0.21+, update the `@serenity-is/tsbuild` package reference to `8.5.6` or later in `package.json`:

```json
"devDependencies": {
    "@serenity-is/tsbuild": "8.5.6"
}
```

If you have a separate `esbuild` entry in your `package.json`, it is recommended to remove it as `tsbuild` already includes a reference.

## Deprecation of `Decorators.option`

The `@Decorators.option()` decorator, used to mark a property as an option, is deprecated. Use constructor options/props instead, as JSX components require options to be passed via the constructor. Setting some options via properties when a widget is created with `jsx-dom` is not possible.

## Unhandled Rejection Handler

Serenity's service-related methods, like `serviceCall`, have switched from jQuery `Ajax (XMLHTTPRequest)` to `fetch`. Since `fetch` uses promises, errors thrown from promises should be caught, unlike with jQuery Ajax calls. The following simple service call might log an unhandled rejection error in the browser console if the server returns an error:

```ts
SomeService.Delete({
    EntityId: 5;
})

// Uncaught (in promise) ...
```

With promises, it is expected to add a catch statement:

```ts
SomeService.Delete({
    EntityId: 5;
}).catch((error) => { 
    // handle error
})
```

We could add a catch inside the `serviceCall` method to make it compatible with the jQuery version, but this would prevent the caller from catching the exception and performing some action based on the error.

To avoid such errors in the console, add the following line in `errorhandling-init.ts` (or `ScriptInit.ts` if not available in your app):

```ts
window.addEventListener("unhandledrejection", ErrorHandling.unhandledRejectionHandler);
```

## `FilePage.HandleUploadRequest` Return Type Change

Due to differences between System.Text.Json and Newtonsoft.Json, change the return type of the `HandleUploadRequest` method in `FilePage.cs` to `UploadResponse` from `ServiceResponse`:

```cs
[NonAction]
private UploadResponse HandleUploadRequest(HttpContext context)
{
```

If this change is not made, upload editors will not work properly, resulting in errors like `Uploaded file is not an image` even if the file is an image, as System.Text.Json does not serialize properties of `UploadResponse` otherwise.

## `IUploadProcessor.Process` No Longer Returns a Success Flag

The `Process` method of the `IUploadProcessor` used to return an object with the `Success` property, which was `true` when upload validation was successful or `false` when it was not, and the `ErrorMessage` property contained information about the problem.

This is no longer the case, and it simply throws an exception in case of an error. Although the `Success` property is still in the returned object, it is deprecated and will always be `true`.

The `if (uploadInfo.success)` line and its `else` block in `FilePage.cs` are no longer necessary. Please see the latest version of `FilePage.cs` in the `StartSharp/Serene` repository.

## Introduction of the `ILocalTextInitializer` Interface

We have introduced a new `ILocalTextInitializer` abstraction, which should be used instead of the `InitializeLocalTexts` method in `Startup.cs`.

Unless you have custom code in `InitializeLocalTexts`, please remove it and use `AddLocalTextInitializer()` in the `ConfigureServices` method:

```cs
public void ConfigureServices(IServiceCollection services)
{
    //...
    services.AddLocalTextInitializer();
}
```

and call `app.InitializeLocalTexts()` in the `Configure` method:

```cs
public void Configure(IApplicationBuilder app, IWebHostEnvironment env)
{
    RowFieldsProvider.SetDefaultFrom(app.ApplicationServices);
    app.InitializeLocalTexts();
    //...
}
```

This interface allows us to reinitialize local texts when necessary, for example, after saving texts in the Translation screen.

If you have custom code in the `InitializeLocalTexts` method, implement the `ILocalTextInitializer` interface (you may subclass `DefaultLocalTextInitializer`) and register it in `Startup.cs`.

## Introduction of the `IPermissionKeyLister` Interface

A new `IPermissionKeyLister` abstraction has been introduced to get a list of permission keys.

```cs
public interface IPermissionKeyLister
{
    IEnumerable<string> ListPermissionKeys(bool includeRoles);
}
```

The code block in `UserPermissionRepository` for discovering permission keys has been moved to the `AppServices.PermissionKeyLister` class, which implements this interface and is registered in `Startup.cs`:

```cs
services.AddSingleton<IPermissionKeyLister, AppServices.PermissionKeyLister>();
```

Currently, there is no default implementation for this abstraction in Serenity itself, as it may change from application to application. For example, some apps might need to load available permission keys from a database table in addition to attributes.

Using this abstraction, we removed the direct dependency on `UserPermissionRepository` from several classes like `PermissionKeysDataScript`, `UserPermissionEndpoint`, etc. Please see the latest code in the StartSharp repository.

## Default Implementations of `IPermissionService` and `IUserAccessor` with Transient Grant/Impersonation Support

The `ITransientGrantor` interface allows transiently (temporarily in memory) granting permissions to the current request user before executing an operation.

Similarly, the `IImpersonator` interface allows transiently (temporarily in memory) impersonating another user before executing an operation.

This permits a user to perform actions they would not normally be allowed to, such as calling a service only available to admins, given the necessary security checks are in place.

For transient granting to work, the `IPermissionService` implementation must also implement the `ITransientGrantor` interface. Similarly, the `IUserAccessor` implementation must also implement the `IImpersonator` interface.

As the default implementations in StartSharp do not support this, we had to wrap our implementations in `Startup.cs` to enable this feature:

```cs
services.AddSingleton<IPermissionService>(services => 
    new TransientGrantingPermissionService(
        ActivatorUtilities.CreateInstance<AppServices.PermissionService>(services),
        services.GetRequiredService<IHttpContextItemsAccessor>()));

services.AddSingleton<IUserAccessor>(services => 
    new ImpersonatingUserAccessor(
        ActivatorUtilities.CreateInstance<AppServices.UserAccessor>(services),
        services.GetRequiredService<IHttpContextItemsAccessor>());
```

The new `AppServices.PermissionService` already implements the `ITransientGrantor` interface, so wrapping is no longer necessary:

```cs
public class PermissionService( /* ... */ ) : IPermissionService, ITransientGrantor {

}
```

It uses the `TransientGrantingPermissionService` internally to easily implement the interface. Please see the latest code of `PermissionService.cs` in the StartSharp repository.

Similarly, the default `UserAccessor` implementation implements the `IImpersonator` interface:

```cs
public class UserAccessor( /* ... */ ) : IUserAccessor, IImpersonator {

}
```

As transient granting/impersonation support might be necessary for some operations like reporting callbacks, it is recommended to apply this change to your permission and user accessor services, even if you don't directly use these features in your application.

## New `AddSingletonWrapped` Helper

Wrapping services in `Startup.cs` might be necessary to add extra abilities to some services, like transient granting, impersonation, etc.

For example, to enable impersonation support for our `IUserAccessor` service, we would need to make the following changes in `Startup.cs`:

```cs
services.AddSingleton<IUserAccessor>(services => 
    new ImpersonatingUserAccessor(
        ActivatorUtilities.CreateInstance<AppServices.UserAccessor>(services), services.GetRequiredService<IHttpContextItemsAccessor>());
```

With the new `AddSingletonWrapper` interface, it is much simpler:

```cs
services.AddSingletonWrapped<IUserAccessor, ImpersonatingUserAccessor, AppServices.UserAccessor>();
```

Note that in the current StartSharp version, the default `IUserAccessor` implementation already has built-in impersonation support, so the above line won't be necessary. It is used in `Startup.cs` for other wrapping, like OpenIddict.

## New Fluent Methods

To improve compatibility with jQuery (note that we don't target 100% compatibility) and make porting code easier, the following methods have been added:

- `Fluent.byId`: a shortcut for `Fluent(document.getElementById)`
- `Fluent.each` and `Fluent.style`: execute a callback with the node or CSS style declaration if the element is not null
- `Fluent.matches`: similar to `$.is` but doesn't support any custom selectors and calls `element.matches`
- `Fluent.class`: directly sets the `className` property, preferred to `addClass` for element creation
- `Fluent.isDefaultPrevented`: helps overcome issues when jQuery exists or not, checking both `e.defaultPrevented` and `e.isDefaultPrevented?.()`
- `Fluent.eventProp`: reads a property from the event, `event.originalEvent`, or `event.detail`, as jQuery does not pass custom properties like `route` to the synthetic event
- `Fluent.getWidget` and `Fluent.tryGetWidget`: get a reference to a widget on the element
- `Fluent.findEach`: executes a callback for each element found with a Fluent object
- `Fluent.after` and `Fluent.before`: similar to jQuery methods

## Breaking Change for JSX-DOM Ref Callbacks

As `jsx-dom` has recently fixed an issue (before version 8.1.4) where ref callbacks were not executed for React-style class components like Serenity Widgets, we will no longer call the ref callback from the Widget itself to avoid double execution. This might cause problems when using an older version of `jsx-dom`. After updating to Serenity 8.4.4+, please update `jsx-dom` in your `package.json` to version 8.1.4+ and run `npm install`.

## Removal of Category Links

Category links on top of forms, hidden since version 8.4.8, are now completely removed. They were generally confusing for end users and were not particularly useful unless the form was very long.

## Updated NPM Packages

The following package references in StartSharp/Serene have been updated:

```json
"@preact/signals": "1.2.3",
"jsvectormap": "1.6.0",
"jsx-dom": "8.1.4",
"moment": "2.30.1",
"preact": "10.22.0",
"chart.js": "4.4.3"
```

Although there are no known breaking changes, it is recommended to keep these packages in sync in your application.